.TH ZEAL 1 "March 2026" "zeal 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zeal \- a structured log query language
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zeal
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] '\fIQUERY\fR'
.br
.B zeal
\fB\-f\fR \fIFILE\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] '\fIQUERY\fR'
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zeal
is a structured log query language and runtime. It reads log files in JSON,
logfmt, syslog, or plain text format, and filters, correlates, and groups
entries using a SQL-like query syntax.
.PP
The killer feature is \fBtemporal correlation\fR: find events that occur within
a specified time window of other events (e.g., errors within 5 seconds of
a warning).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-file " " \fIPATH\fR
Log file to read. Can be used instead of or in addition to the
.B FROM
clause in the query. May be specified multiple times.
.TP
.BR \-\-format " " \fIFMT\fR
Output format. One of:
.RS
.TP
.B text
Human-readable with ANSI colors (default).
.TP
.B json
NDJSON \(em one JSON object per matching entry. Pipe-friendly.
.TP
.B raw
Original raw log lines, no decoration.
.RE
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI color output. Equivalent to \fB\-\-color never\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-color " " \fIMODE\fR
Color mode:
.B auto
(default, detect TTY),
.B always\fR,
or
.B never\fR.
.TP
.BR \-F ", " \-\-follow
Follow the file for new entries (like \fBtail \-f\fR). Polls every 200ms.
Handles log rotation (detects file truncation).
.TP
.BR \-\-explain
Show the query execution plan without running the query.
.SH QUERY SYNTAX
.SS FROM clause
.nf
\fBFROM\fR \fIpath\fR [, \fIpath\fR ...]
\fBFROM\fR stdin
.fi
.PP
Specifies one or more log sources. File format is auto-detected.
.SS WHERE clause
.nf
\fBWHERE\fR \fIexpression\fR
.fi
.PP
Filter entries. Supports field comparisons, boolean logic (AND, OR, NOT),
parenthesized grouping, and temporal correlation.
.SS Comparison operators
.nf
=  !=  >  <  >=  <=  CONTAINS  MATCHES
.fi
.PP
String comparisons are case-insensitive. Numeric fields stored as strings
are auto-coerced for numeric operators.
.SS Temporal correlation
.nf
\fBWHERE\fR \fIcondition\fR \fBWITHIN\fR \fIduration\fR \fBOF\fR \fIanchor\fR
.fi
.PP
Matches entries satisfying \fIcondition\fR that occur within \fIduration\fR of
an entry satisfying \fIanchor\fR.
.PP
Duration units: \fBms\fR, \fBs\fR, \fBm\fR, \fBh\fR, \fBd\fR.
.PP
Uses binary search on sorted timestamps for O(n\ log\ m) performance.
.SS GROUP BY clause
.nf
\fBGROUP BY\fR \fIfield\fR [, \fIfield\fR ...]
.fi
.PP
Group matching entries by field value(s).
.SS SHOW clause
.nf
\fBSHOW FIRST\fR \fIn\fR
\fBSHOW LAST\fR \fIn\fR
\fBSHOW COUNT\fR
.fi
.PP
Limit output to the first or last \fIn\fR entries, or show only the count.
.SH LOG FORMATS
.B zeal
auto-detects the log format from the first line:
.TP
.B JSON
Lines starting with \fB{\fR. Fields are extracted from JSON keys.
.TP
.B logfmt
Lines containing \fBkey=value\fR pairs.
.TP
.B Plain text
Everything else. Level and timestamp are detected heuristically.
.PP
Well-known fields mapped automatically:
level/lvl/severity, message/msg/text/body, timestamp/ts/time/t/@timestamp.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
# Find errors
zeal 'FROM /var/log/app.json WHERE level = "error"'

# Errors within 5 seconds of a warning
zeal 'FROM /var/log/app.json WHERE level = "error" WITHIN 5s OF level = "warn"'

# Group by request ID, show first entry per group
zeal 'FROM app.json WHERE level = "error" GROUP BY request_id SHOW FIRST 1'

# JSON output
zeal \-\-format json 'FROM app.json WHERE status >= 500'

# Follow mode
zeal \-\-follow 'FROM /var/log/app.log WHERE level = "error"'

# Query plan
zeal \-\-explain 'FROM app.json WHERE level = "error" GROUP BY request_id'
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Parse error or runtime error.
.SH AUTHOR
Written as a demonstration of zero-copy log processing in Zig.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR jq (1),
.BR grep (1),
.BR tail (1),
.BR awk (1)
